Tutorials (#221)
applied-material-modeling/neml2: doc/tutorials/models/model_parameters/main.md

@insert-title:tutorials-models-model-parameters

[TOC]

## Problem description

In this tutorial, we will revisit the problem defined in the previous tutorial and demonstrate how to work with model parameters.

Recall that the linear elasticity material model can be mathematically written as
\f[
  \boldsymbol{\sigma} = 3 K \operatorname{vol} \boldsymbol{\varepsilon} + 2 G \operatorname{dev} \boldsymbol{\varepsilon}.
\f]
Also recall that all NEML2 models can be written in the following general form
\f[
  y = f(x; p, b).
\f]
Pattern matching suggests the following set definitions:
\f[
  x = \left\{ \boldsymbol{\varepsilon} \right\}, \quad y = \left\{ \boldsymbol{\sigma} \right\}, \quad p = \left\{ K, G \right\}, \quad b = \varnothing.
\f]

> ## Parameter v.s. buffer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Parameter vs buffer
```
though v.s. is actually more proper it looks weird.

Both \f$ K \f$ and \f$ G \f$ are here categorized as model parameters. The major differences between parameters and buffers are

> - Parameters are "trainable", whereas buffers are not. NEML2 can use automatic differentiation to calculate the derivative of output variables w.r.t. the model parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Parameters are "trainable", whereas buffers are not. NEML2 can use automatic differentiation to calculate the derivative of output variables with respect to the model parameters, but not for the model buffers.
```

> - Parameters can be (recursively) defined by other models, whereas buffers cannot.

Reviewer: You may want to clarify this with an example.

Author: I added a link here pointing to "Model parameters revisited" which should explain this.

> In summary, parameter is a more powerful superset of buffer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, a parameter is a more powerful superset of a buffer.  However, there is overhead cost associated with maintaining a parameter that buffers avoid.
```

    print("{}:".format(pname))
    print(pval.tensor())
  ```
  @endsource

  Output:
  ```
  @attach-output:src2
  ```

</div>

neml2::Model::get_parameter can be used to retrieve a specific parameter given its name. In other words, the above code is equivalent to

<div class="tabbed">

- <b class="tab-title">C++</b>
  @source:src3
  ```cpp
  #include "neml2/models/Model.h"
  #include "neml2/tensors/Tensor.h"

  using namespace neml2;

  int
  main()
  {
    auto & model = load_model("input.i", "my_model");

    auto & G = model.get_parameter("G");
    auto & K = model.get_parameter("K");

    std::cout << "G:\n" << Tensor(G) << std::endl;
    std::cout << "K:\n" << Tensor(K) << std::endl;
  }
  ```
  @endsource

  Output:
  ```
  @attach-output:src3
  ```
- <b class="tab-title">Python</b>
  In Python, model parameters can be more conveniently retrieved as attributes, i.e.

  @source:src4
  ```python
  import neml2

  model = neml2.load_model("input.i", "my_model")

  G = model.G
  K = model.K

  print("G:")
  print(G.tensor())
  print("K:")
  print(K.tensor())
  ```
  @endsource

  Output:
  ```
  @attach-output:src4
  ```

</div>

## Updating the parameter value

> Model parameters can always be changed by changing the input file. However, in certain cases (e.g., training and optimization), the parameter values should preferrably be updated at runtime (e.g., after each Epoch or optimization iteration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Model parameters can always be changed by changing the input file. However, in certain cases (e.g., training and optimization), the parameter values should preferrably be updated at runtime (e.g., after each epoch or optimization iteration).
```
